GM Style!
---------

	This documentation is designed to explain how to setup a Opening Book in the way that
Yace will play following a GM style.

	The objective is to make a Opening Book that mimic some GM preferences so, this will 
not influence how Yace plays when out of opening book.


How to do this?
---------------

	First of all, you need a good collection of games of its favorite GM. You can obtain 
this PGN files on the internet or, perhaps, you can find many games on Fritz-CD, ChessBase, 
ChessMaster 8.000 or another commercial product. You can use Scid, a free chess database 
product too.

	Let us suppose that you already have the wanted file. A good idea, in my opinion, is 
to discard whole the games that GM lost or it tied. These games probably contain openings with 
bad moves! Now, you have to create two files. In one of these files you have to copy all white 
games of the selected GM. In the other file, just copy all black games played by the GM. 

	Let us say that you create a file called Talwhite.pgn and another: Talblack.pgn.

	Now, before we create the file of openings of Yace, we needed to mark whole the moves 
made by our GM with the flag: !! (very good moves). With that, when Yace meets in positions of 
the opening in that GM has made some movement, the movement it will be recognized by the 
flag !!.

	For that, we will use the command carlos_pgn according to the example below, being 
applied the same procedure for the file with the movements of white as the one of black.

	carlos_pgn talwhite.pgn white.pgn n 3 0

	After this, we have to use the same command to the black file:

	carlos_pgn talblack.pgn black.pgn n 0 3

	Observe that the command line is not exactly equal, of the first time we used 3 0, 
marking the white moves with !!, in the other file we needed to mark the black ones with !!, 
then we used 0 3! ( For more information about this command, please read at the end of this 
document ).

	After the execution of these commands, two files were created, a file called white.pgn 
and other black.pgn. In white.pgn whole the white movements are marked with !!, and in black.pgn 
all the black movements are marked with !!. You can open the files with its favorite text editor 
to confirm.

	Now, we have to create the learn book file, and add the GM moves.

	For that, we will indicate the name of the file:  
  
book_f dblearn.bin  
  
	Ready, we indicated the name of the file for Yace. If you want, you can specify any 
diferent name, as kasparov.bin, for example, but then, you need to make more modifications in 
the Yace.ini file, read more informations on this in the end of this document. I used the 
name dblearn.bin because this is the default file name used by Yace and automatically opened. 
After that command, Yace will exhibit a mistake message, don't worry, it is normal, because 
the file specified doesn't still exist. We are going therefore to create it with the command 
book_create, let us see: 
  
book_c nul 10000 1  
  
	After the execution of the command above, the file dblearn.bin be just created, but it 
is empty. Now we needed to add the movements of GM to the file, for that we will use the 
command book_add twice, let us see: 
  
book_add white.pgn 40  
  
	After the conclusion of this command, the movements of white were added, we will repeat 
the command for the file that contains the black movements:  
  
book_add black.pgn 40  
  
	Ready! Now our file dblearn.bin is already prepared! :-)  
	Close the Yace. Soon after, open ( with your text editor ) the file Yace.ini and 
verify if it contains the line: 
  
book_learn 7 
  
	Attention! That line is essential, without it Yace won't open our file dblearn.bin!  
  
	Ending, if its file Yace.ini already contains the specified line, it is already 
everything certain and you can already open Yace in Winboard to verify everything it is running 
fine! ;-)) 


Better explanation of some commands and tricks:
-----------------------------------------------


carlos_pgn : 
------------
	
	In the sample, we have used this command to mark white or black moves with the 
flag !!. That command has several other functions. Even so, we will explain here, a little 
better the operation of this command with the objective that used previously.

	The command syntax is:

	carlos_pgn inputfile outputfile n number number

	Where: 

	inputfile  - the name of file that will be used. Has to be a PGN file!

	outputfile - the name of the file that will be created by Yace with the apropriated 
flags added

	n - tells Yace the procedure that it will be applied to the file, that is to say, 
to add flags! 

	number - this first number indicates the flag that will be added to the white moves.

	number - this second number indicate the flags that will be added to the black moves.

	This numbers are equal to flag, see below:

	 3 means !! or very good move.
	 2 means !  or good move.     
	 1 means !? or interesting move.
	 0 means =  or no action or no flag!
	-1 means ?! or not so good move.
	-2 means ?  or bad move.
	-3 means ?? or very bad move.

	Now, a small example. Let us suppose that you want to alter the file kaspywhite.pgn, 
adding the flag ! to all the white movements. Obligatorily a new modified file will be created, 
staying the file kaspywhite.pgn untouched. Then, we will choose a name any, as white.pgn, for 
the file that should be created by Yace. We would have then accordingly below a command:

	carlos_pgn kaspywhite.pgn white.pgn n 2 0

	Remember: if you want to add flags to the black moves, and make no changes in the white 
moves, you have to set the first number to 0 ( zero ) and the second number accordingly to the
needed flag.


How to use a learn file with name different of dblearn.bin:
-----------------------------------------------------------

In the example that we mentioned previously, we created the file dblearn.bin and we added 
the prepared files with the wanted "flags". Even so, in case you need, you can create the file 
learn of Yace with a different name. However, by default, Yace tries to open learn file the 
file: dblearn.bin. Then, if you create a learn file with name different from the default, you 
should instruct Yace to open this file when it begins. For that, it is enough to add the 
command lbook_f to the file Yace.ini specifying the name of the file to be open. Suppose that 
you want to use as learn file, the file kasparov.bin, then you would need to add to the file 
Yace.ini, the command line below:  
  
lbook_f kasparov.bin  
  
Ok! When Yace begins, then it will open that learn file!


How to adjust Yace to play closer to the style of a GM?
-------------------------------------------------------


By default, when Yace finds two or more movements marked with !!, it will attribute to the 
movements a same value, so that the probability of playing anyone of the movements, in the 
position, it will be the same. Suppose that in the opening, you have the movements: e4, d4 
and Nf3 marked with !!. In that case, each movement will have 33% of chances of being executed. 
However, in the database that you used to copy the style of GM, you noticed that the player 
prefers to play e4 most of the time, let us say 62%! Then, won't its learn file, be very close 
to the style of GM, does it agree? Even so, there is a command that allows Yace to use the 
statistics contained in the learn file that you created, this command is: book_mode.  
For that, is necessary to edit and add to the file Yace.ini the line:  
  
book_mode 2  
  
Ready! Now, Yace will use the statistics of the learn file to select its movements in the 
opening, really cool!


That's it!

Herley Mühlenbruch Guimarães - 18/12/2.001


