Note, there is some useful information in this text, but also much
very technical descriptions. Feel free to ignore all of the later.

Yace now has a Web page: http://home1.stofanet.dk/moq/
This was all the work of Mogens Larsen. I wish to thank him very much
for this!

Version > 0.99.50

Note that some documentation of new commands is missing.

9978, 9979: Minor tweaks, mostly only interesting for playing under
"real" tournament conditions with a "normal" board and chess clock.

9977: Minor speedups

9976: Implemented annotate command
Ouput some info about TB and interior node statistics at the end
of a search in UCI mode.
autoplayer_delay defaulted to 600 ms. Changed to 0.       

9975:
Don't show the same winner against me in fi note several times.
New command nsgames ("name save games")

after

nsgames _200211.pgn

Yace will save the games opponent wise in PGNs like crafty_200211.pgn, 
comet_200211.pgn, etc. Note, that when you have an sgames command, too, 
the games will be saved twice.

New option to cadiz_pgn/add_eco. Command "m" (match) will show results 
of Yace from some PGNs with some counts of wins/draws/losses, the ECO 
codes, and the results, as the matches proceed.

At some time recently, disabled much pruning. Enabled again.

Fixed a bug in UCI command searchmoves, which could yield in a crash.

9974:
New command book_split. Documentation will follow.
Fixed a bug in pawn endgames. Drawn pawnendgames with only a-pawn were not
seen as draw, while won pawn endgames with b-pawns were seen as drawn.

9973 and older:
Some new engine options available via UCI engine setup.
Implemented book learning in UCI mode.
Yace was not using dblearn.bin in UCI mode - fixed.
Some changes in search, including a bug fix of too much extensions in
some pawn endgames.
Clain draw by insufficient material for KBK and KNK.
Display different scores for mate in xboard mode. With this change,
Chesspartner should display correct mate scores.
Added support, so that time controls like 40 moves in 2 hours, rest of the
game in one hour should work under ChessPartner. (the pure xboard protocol
does at the moment of this writing not support such time controls).
Fixed a problem with Chesspartner and pondering with ICS games.
Added a new section for Chesspartner/ERT that should support more
complicated tournament time controls, and also switching of the engine book.
New command book_clean, that will delete any NAGs from the opening book.
dbbook.bin will be used, or the book set by book_file.
To PV moves from EGTBs, add !! to moves for the winning side, when
all alternative moves yield draw or are losing. (! means, that it is
the only move, that yields the shortest mate, but at least one other
move is winning, too).
Added interior node recogognition and memory bitbases for 3 and 4-men
endgames. New commands create_bitbases and bbpath.
Added cadiz_pgn command.
Added tb_usage command. tb_usage 3 is the default. tb_usage 0 will
almost not use TBs. tb_usage 4 will use TBs extremely.
When the expected move and the move by the opponent differ, report the
expected move in the PGN as a variant.
Added "win_human", "win_computers", "win_all", "win_file", "prompt_human",
"prompt_all", "prompt_computer", commands for automatically setting
finger notes of recent opponents that won against Yace on ICSes.
Added book_mode command.
Added the file gmstyle.txt to the distribution. This file was contributed
by Herley Muhlenbruch. Thanks a lot!
Added info about the depth of already stored analysis info to the log
file, when running under WB-GUIs. This info may be useful, when analysing
positions, and using the persistant hash tables of Yace ("temporary
learning"). A tail like utility can be used to watch the log file
while analyzing. See for example
http://www.winboardengines.de/html/wbdownload.html
Under Unix, use tail -f
Handle the extremely rare cases, where castling is possible in TB
positions correctly.
Fixed a bug in PGN reading. Yace did not allow Strings to split lines
in comments. So
20. Bxh6 {Karpov mentioned: "I was happy
after this move"} caused an error.
Fixed another PGN reading bug. Comments "{}" in variations "()", that had again
something in parentheses confused Yace, when the perentheses didn't all
match (which is not needed inside comments).
Reading PGN files for book_parse, book_add and book_create in binary mode
now. This is needed, because some PGN files have the old DOS-style end of
file character embedded somewhere in the middle. Input processing had stopped
at this point ...
Thanks to Ferdinand Mosca for giving an example PGN that showed all those
problems.
Added ignore_system command. After this command, yace will ignore all
system/shell commands (the commands starting with !).
This is useful, when zippypassword2 is used for ICS play, and will for
example not allow to delete files via this password.
Fixed a bug for book_create and book_add. Essentially it made Yace
also store drawn games in the book, when the use_result was indicating
that only winning moves should be stored. Sorry ...
Added a command cooktest.
cooktest filename.epd
will run an EPD-testsuite, but it will disable the analysis of the given
bm solutions. This can be helpful to people, who are designing test-suites
to find out, if there are alternative solutions.
Added a command, to change the maximum size of the file poslearn.bin.
By default, this has space for 10000 positions. To resize this, start
Yace in text mode and type

posentries 20000

to change the size to 20000 positions. Only making the size bigger is
supported. Note, that Yace will need 16 bytes of memory for each position.
Note, that this command must only be used once, don't put such a line into
yace.ini.
Fixed a bug, where Yace could crash under very rare circumstances (probably i
impossible in normal games). Thanks to Christian Goralski for finding this.
Fixed a bug in the evaluation of K+P vs K endgames.
Added a poor man's n-best mode, which is only usable with the text interface
(or with UCI GUIs that support this, like Shredder 5).
Type
eml 1
(eml = edit move list) to enter this mode. Then, before each move, you
will see a list of legal moves. If you want to disable a move from analysis,
type the move numer followed by ENTER. This will toggle the status of the
move from e=enabled to d=disabled. To leave this mode, type eml 0.
Changed the behaviour in case of fail high and fail low. Now the search
window will be opened gradually.
Some changes for drawish endgames, where the stronger side has no
pawns left.
Store search depth and search time in the PGN.
Experimentally tweaked search extensions.
Added book_random command. Default is 1. With book_random 0, Yace will
allways execute the most popular move from the book. When 2 or more moves
have the same count, or have !! attached, one of those will be still
selected randomly. There are many issues arising with this. E.g. expect
many duplicate games in engine matches, that use a similar non randomizing
book selection scheme.
Again some tweaks to f6/h6 code.
Added support for only analyzing selected moves under UCI. That I have
forgot this earlier yielded also in the fact, that Analyze game under
the S5 GUI did not work, as it should.
Show the maximum search depth under UCI.
Changed some values connected with passed pawns and backward pawns.
"Mirrored" the code for dangerous P/B on f3/f6/h3/h6 to the Q-side
for typically Q-side castled positions.
Added routine for queen endgames (Only Qs and pawns).
Experimentally added nullmove pruning to some pawnendgames, where
both sides have more than 3 pawns.

Version 0.99.50

Added tips.txt contributed by Matt Josephson.
Added lbookc.bat to create an "empty" learn-book, that is preoccupied
with NAGs by Mogens Larsen.
Some updates to readme.txt. Still much is missing ...
Added ECO classification.
New command show_eco. show_eco 1 (the default) will will print ECO code,
and opening into pgn files. show_eco 2 will also kibitz or whisper (depending
on the setting of whisper and autokib, and a Computer or human opponent)
the ECO opening to ICS, and show the opening under Winboard. See also
readme.txt.
show_eco 0 will disable all this.
Under ICS, Yace will automatically set finger note 1 to the program name
and version number.
Using some evaluation parameters as suggested by Ferdinand Mosca. Thanks!
Fixed a small misfeature, where Yace could think for a forced
move with ponder on, even, after it received the move of the opponent.
Added overwrite_vgm command. Defaults to 0. After
overwrite_vgm 1
in yace.ini, Yace will be allowed, to overwrite !! moves (vgm = "very
good move") in the opening book by the same move as ?? in the learn
book. By default, Yace will not overwrite the !!.
Changed handling of backward pawns on half-open files. This also may yield
in slightly better handling of majorities, however much knowledge is missing
here.
With winboard 4.2.3 it could happen, that Yace moves immediately
for the first move when starting an adjourned game at an ICS
just after starting WB (and Yace). Fixed.
New command min_learn_tc. Gives time control in seconds, for which book
learning will start. A game length of 60 moves is assumed for this.
So, with Fischer clock 5 minutes + 3 seconds, a length of 480 seconds
is assumed. min_learn_tc defaults to 300 (=5 minutes).
Some changes to PGN formating.
New command lbook_file. Defaults to dblearn.bin.
Automatic book learning added. Will be ignored under Shredder 5 at the moment.
I suggest putting the line
book_learn 7
into yace.ini for enabling this. Better documentation will follow.
With the above line, Yace will not repeat a line an, that lost a game.
Yace will *not* try to repeat won games.
Added new optional parameters to book_create and book_add.
Fixed a bug, where Yace in very rare cases could forfeit on time in
the first move after continuing an adjourned game when playing on ICS.
This could happen, when Yace was white, and had very little time left,
and the opponent had much time left, because Yace used the wrong clock.
Added some code for dangerous pawns or bishops on f3/f6 and h3/h6 when
the king is in a typically kingside-castling position.
Added epdtest command. (epdtest testsuite.epd)
Added read_pgn command. (read_pgn games.pgn or read_pgn games.pgn 10
to read the 10th game in the pgn.)
Modified handling of open/half open files around the king.
Modified values for pawns defending the king in castled positions.
Added kids_mode command. Defaults to 0. With
kids_mode 1
in yace.ini, yace will not search any moves, and just play a random
legal move. It will however use the opening book.
with kids_mode 2, Yace will just do an extremely short search of 1 ply.
It will use the opening book. You can disable the opening book by
use_book off
If kids_mode 1 is too easy and kids_mode 2 is too difficult, you can
slightly weaken Yace by adding the line
qexact 1
to yace.ini.
Added some error messages in tight memory situations while book building.
Under very rare circumstances, in ICS play it could happen, that Yace
lost a game in the first move, because of a resign in the last game.
Fixed. Thanks to Jose Luis Jimenez for finding this.
Increased bonus for the bishop pair.
Rewritten pawn shield code, following suggestions by Ferdinand Mosca.
Added some knowledge about connected passed pawns on rank 6 vs. rook.
Added version command. Usually Yace will tell its name to Winboard as
Yace 0.99.xx or similar. After you put a line

version chessfan specially tuned

it will use "Yace 0.99.xx chessfan specially tuned" instead. This will
also be seen in the PGN files of WB 4.2 or later, and in the hello
message at internet chess servers.
Small fixes for Bishop of opposite colors code with otherwise unequal
material.
Don't log the stat output anymore.
Fixed a typo (Selectifity instead of Selectivity) in the engine parameters
as an UCI engine. This typo had the consequence, that the Selectivity
setting was essentially ignored. Thanks to Mogens Larsen, for pointing this
out.
Experimental pawn endgame code added.
As an UCI mode, optionally show the hash efficiency. Not, that this is
not the hash filling of other UCI engines, but rather the value:
successful probes/hash probes.
More aggressive TB-probing (may yield in significantly slower NPS).
Report some information more continiously to the UCI GUI.
Added extension, when a trade yields a pawn endgame.
Small bug in move formating: When two pieces can move to the same
square, but one was with check (because of a discovered check), Yace
forgot to put the file (or rank or both) of the from square. Even, if
the move is unambigous, this is wrong. (So output was i.e. Nh6+ instead
of Ngh6+)
In Analyzse mode, Yace will temporarily remember important results
of analysed moves/subtrees. So, if at a the root of a analyze tree,
Yace cannot see, that a move is very good or very bad, but it
recognizes this, after you have done some moves, and then you go back,
Yace should know, that the line yields a good/bad score, and may find
a different move, or try a different refutation.
Added cp.txt. This is my suggestion for enginiext.ini for the
ChessPartner GUI. It is totally untested by me.
Implemented sd command.
Fixed a bug in the handling of black outposts.
If you put a line
whisper
into yace.ini, Yace won't whisper anymore in ICS mode.
(Default is whispering, or with the line "whisper kibitz" kibitzing.)
Fixed a small problem with 50 moves rule: Yace did not take into account,
that it can mate or can get mated with the last move, even when this is
not a capture or a pawn push.
Implemented sd command for searching to a particular depth.
Defaulting to positional learning enabled.
To run Yace under the Millenium Chess System, please add the line
GUI MCS
to yace.ini.
Added support for UCI. Multi Variants mode won't work yet.
Under UCI you should use Yace without ini file, if you do not really
know what you are doing. Important parameters should be set in the engines
setup of the GUI instead. Under UCI Yace will default to use its own book. I had some problems to make work this reliably. It seems to
be needed, that you create an empty book under Shredder and select this
for Yace. Also check "Use engine book" under BookOptions. If you uncheck
"Use engine book", Yace will never access its own book.
Added support for WB protocol version 2.
Solved a problem, when not having a full set of EGTBs. I.e. sometimes
Yace refused to promote a pawn, when having KPPKP and not KQPKP.
In endgame, give outside passed pawns more value.
Added some knowledge about supported/connected/blocked passed pawns.
Added yace.bmp to the distribution, so you can see the Yace logo
under Fritz with newer versions of the WB adapter.
Ponder also, when the ponder move is forced.
Added event command, to fill out event tag in PGNs.
Use
event My tournament
in yace.ini. Don't use '"' in the text after event.
Slight format changes in the PGN.
Make book_holes and book_learn work under CB. Will sometimes not work
in the exected way with permanent brain. This is due to the design
of the WB adapter, that sometimes really doesn't tell the engine, if
it searches for itself, or if it should search a ponder move for the
opponent.
Added max_PV_WB and max_PV_tellics. These are the maximum number of
characters Yace will send to WB in the PVs for displaying in search, ponder
and analyzed mode, and in the ICS whisper/kibitz output. Default is
200 and 350. Usage of too high numbers make current versions of WB crash.
Added space_in_PV command, default zero. If you prefer
1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 or 1...e5 2. Nf3
in the PV to
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 or 1...e5 2.Nf3
use space_in_PV 1 in yace.ini.
Show move numbers in PV.
Added move_number_in_PV command. Default 1. To disable move numbers in PV
use move_number_in_PV 0 in yace.ini.
Use short algebraic notation (SAN) for PVs.
Resolve the PV, when it ends with an endbase table hit. In Analyse
mode, this will be done for all PVs, in "normal" search only for
the last PV before the search exits. Note, that due to a bug in Winboard,
sometimes not the whole PV can be shown, when it is too long. Sending a
too long PV to WB makes it crash. The same is true for Fritz, which can
crash, when PVs with more than 30 half moves are sent. Also Fritz won't
display any PV, when more than 30 half move are sent.
You will be able to see the whole PV in the log file, or when using Yace
without GUI.
Implemented code for rook pawn with wrong bishop.
In B or N vs pawns, allways prefer the pawn(s).
Yace knew, that KNNK is draw, but KNNKP was evaluted high for the Ns.
Now, the score will be very close to draw.
Whisper/kibitz table probes/found in ICS mode.
Give passed pawns, that cannot be catched by opponent king higher value,
when opponent has no pieces.
Implemented Bitboards for pawn scoring.
WB didn't like the error message of Yace, when no book was found. Fixed.
Make endings with only rooks and pawns more drawish.
Search will be more careful about repetition and 50 moves rule.
Added some code about good/bad bishop/knight and blocked positions.
Save the game and bklearn.pgn even when quit is received in ponder mode. This
is needed for ChessVision. Thanks to Carlos Pesce for reporting the bug.
Added log_path command. If you want to use this, put it as the first line
in yace.ini like
log_path logs\
on DOS/Windows or
log_path logs/
on Unix. This would place all the log files created by auto_log into
this directory, considered as a subdirectory of the yace directory. You
have to create the directory first. Also, the backslash '\' or slash '/'
at the end of the command is needed. You can also use a directory totally
unrelated to the Yace directory by i.e.
log_path c:\my\path\to\the\logs\
Rename start.pgn to samplest.pgn, so that the start.pgn will not be
overwritten when unpacking the zip. Thanks to Jason Williams for pointing
this out.
Make positional learning and sgames work under the CB GUI.
Fix for pawn_shield code, shouldn't move Rh1h2 or Rh8h7 when not castled.
New command auto_log. With the line
auto_log
in yace.ini, for each game a new log file will be written. The name
of the log file will be yacennnn.log. Also, in yacegam.pgn, the name
of the log file will be written under the tag LogFile.
Endgames with opposite colored bishops are drawish.
New defaults for many search parameters.
For playing under Chess Academy, put a line
GUI ChessAcademy
into yace.ini.
Don't abort search after about 4.2 billion nodes. Some output
will be wrong, like NPS and nodes.
Accept and ignore "." while searching/pondering. This seems to be
needed for MCS.
Added a new parameter use_result to book_create.
book_c book.pgn initial_entries maxply mincount use_result
When use_result is 1, only moves from games are counted, that win, draw
or have no result. When use_result is 2, winning moves are counted double and drawing moves once.
When use_result is 3, only winning moves are counted.
Added comment command. If you have a line
comment Just a test game
in yace.ini, In the games file, there will be a new tag
[Comment "Just a test game"]
Again many people have helped to find bugs and point out weaknesses
of Yace. Until version number 1.0, I hope to have a complete list.
Thanks a lot.

Version 0.23 04.10.2000
You need to create or download a new opening book for this version.
Slightly changed the book_create command. Please reread the paragraph
about the book creation in readme.txt.
Added the shell scripts bookc and bench contributed by
Ralph Joerg Hellmig to the Linux distribution.
Added start.pgn contributed by Mogens Larsen to the deistribution.
Slightly changed book move selection scheme.
Added show_book command, see sample yace.ini file.
Don't use less time for the search with time control 60 moves in time,
than with time control game in time. This was suggested (not for Yace)
by Uri Blass.
Added the Yace logo created by Margit Eberl to the distribution.
Added positional learning. Put
pos_learn 1
into yace.ini to enable. Yace then will write two files, learnpos.bin and
learnpos.yac. The later is an ASCII text file, that also can be imported by
import_pos learnpos.yac. Positional learning will currently only be done,
when Yace starts from the initial position. Also, Yace cannot learn under the
ChessBase GUI, but it can use the learned data when not starting from the initial
position or under the ChessBase GUI.
Currently there is only space for 10000 positions, but that might get increased soon.
Added book_file command. By default all opening book operations are
for the file dbbook.bin. You can change this by
book_file mybook.bin
or similar.
Don't stop moving after resigned, so the opponent can enjoy to mate me,
if he really wants.
Implemented noise command. See sample yace.ini.
When resigning in xboard mode also send "tellics resign" to the GUI.
This is needed for ChessVision.
Make Yace more forgivng to errors in PGN files.
Possibly announce mate on Chess Servers. Default is not to announce mates.
Put a line
announce_mate kibitz
into yace.ini to let Yace announce mates by kibitz. Other possibilities
might be "announce_mate whisper" or "announce_mate say".
Display scores in pawn units instead of centipawn units. Also display
Mat02 isntead of 29997. The same is true for the whisper/kibitz output
on chess servers.
When failing to open the ini file from the command line, yace.ini
will be tried. This should avoid problems, when accidently given
a command line parameter.
Fixed a bug with move input. Some illegal moves were accepted. I.e.
1. e53 was accepted and interpreted as 1. e3. Thanks to Jason Williamson for
reporting this.
Added many error messages, that you hopefully will never see.
Small documentation updates.
Added many comments to yace.ini.
Added sgames command to save the games of Yace together with scores.
Use a line
sgames yace.pgn
in yace.ini.
Speeded up book_parse, book_create and book_add, when user forgets to
set the hash size to zero.
Added egtb_cache command to set the chache size for endgame tables.
This must be before tbldir in yace.ini. Default is 2M.
Increased the size of some internal structures for better aligning and speed.
Also increased the maximum number of moves in a game from 250 to 480.
Added book_holes command to ease detection of holes in the opening book.
If you set book_holes to n, and Yace will be out of book in the nth move
or earlier, some data will be written to bkholes.pgn. Default is zero,
which means, that this feature will not be used. To let Yace report, when
it is out of the opening book in the 6th move or earlier, put a line
book_holes 6
into yace.ini.
Found a bug in search, where a draw by repetition was feared too early.
Thanks to Jason Williamson, for pointing out a game, where this happened.
Found a subtle bug in repetition detection. When the last irreversible move
is a double pawn push, and the pawn cannot be captured ep, the
repetition counter could be one too low. This is accidently also fixing
a bug reported by Gabor Szots, where in rare cases Yace blundered, while
using endgame tables after a double pawn push.
Added fen command. This will print the FEN of the current position.
Added half automated book learning. If you set book_learn 1 in yace.ini,
Yace will append some information to a file bklearn.dat, when it thinks,
it came bad out of book. What means bad out of book depends on the value
of margin_book_learn_white and margin_book_learn_black. The defaults are
-70 and -50 (centipawns) amd can be overwritten in yace.ini. When in the
first ten moves out of book, the score gets smaller than this value,
the information will be written down to bklearn.pgn.
This file could be used with
book_add bklearn.pgn
but is actually meant to be inspected first.
All learning features will be ignored with the Winboard Adapter of ChessBase.
Changed whisper output. Thanks to Jason Williamson for his suggestions.
New command say for chess servers. At the start of a new game,
Yace will print "tellics say Hello ..."
If you have a line
say kibitz
in yace.ini, it will instead print "tellics kibitz Hello ..."
Added autokibitz command for chess servers. when set to 1, Yace will
automatically kibitz against a computer opponent, and whisper against
an human opponent. Default is 0.
Added bk command. Now under Winboard, Help->Book should work. To examine
the opening book, you can use Mode->Edit Game and input moves.
Then Help->Book. Also from the Yace prompt, you can use
new, force, input moves, bk. (Also undo and remove can be handy here).
Try to be more careful about open/half-open h-lines.
Less aggressive pruning at depth 2.
Added book_add command to add book lines to existing book.
Allow comments in the pgn for book creation/addition to span lines.
Maximum comment length is 2000. After this, it will be assumed, that the
input is missing a closing comment character.
Fritz didn't like, when Yace sent long PVs. Tried to fix this.
Minor speedups.
Allow switching the ponder mode under Winboard.
Fixed a bug with setboard. Castling rights and ep square could have been wrong.
Tried to fix problems reported by Jason Williamson with Permanent Brain
under Fritz.
Fixed a bug in search. Yace would crash, when no pseudo legal was possible at
all. Never happened to me in a real game, but seen in an constructed
(not reachable by legal moves) position.
Added a few comments to the sample ini file.
Accept new while pondering. This is needed for CA. Thanks to Djordje Vidanovic
for reporting the problem.
Report the commands in yace.ini to the log.
Fixed small glitch in Analyze mode, when search exited, i.e. because a
mate was found. After this, Winboard didn't show the search statistics.
!? and ?! worked the wrong way around. Thanks to Mogens Larsen for reporting.
Added tellics command when playing on ICS. Now yace will by default
whisper the PVs when playing on an ICS. You can put a line
whisper kibitz
into yace.ini, if you prefer kibitz instead of whisper.
Also
whisper anytext
is possible, and might be useful, if there is an alias set for anytext.
Thanks very much to Ralph Joerg Hellmig for his suggestions and tests.
Implemented new hash table strategy.
Added cv_yace.ini for ChessVision.
Added GUI command for auto detection of ChessAssistant.
Don't cut PVs for ChessAssistant.
Don't show 'H' at the end ov PV moves under ChessAssistent.
Don't resign under ChessAssitant.
Added ca.txt for some setup information under ChessAssistant. Thanks
to Victor Zakharov for providing the information.
Fixed small bug in search: probing of EGTBs could have been delayed by
one ply.
Book selection of ? moves was wrong, fixed.
Castling rights after edit (Winboard setup position) could be wrong
in rare cases, fixed.
Thanks to Carlos Pesce for reporting the last two problems.
Slightly changed the output in Analyze mode under Winboard, so that
now it can be seen, when Yace fail high or low.
Let Yace post longer PVs under Winboard.
Show a more informative display of the book move selection in the log
(or on the screen, when not in xboard_mode).
Fixed yet another bug in time synchronization with Fritz GUI. Thanks
to Mogens Larsen for reporting and testing.
Revised null move algorithm again. Description in readme.txt is not
up to date. null_split will be ignored. No change with default settings.
Fixed bug in qsearch. Fail low score could have been too small, probably
not of practical relevance.
Thanks to Sarah Bird, Christian Goralski, Ralph Joerg Hellmig,
Mogens Larsen, Ferdinand Mosca, Carlos Pesce, Gerhard Sonnabend,
Djordje Vidanovic and Jason Williamson for testing and sending feedback.
Special thanks to Margit Eberl for creating the Yace logo.

Version 0.22 26.07.2000
Note, readme.txt probably is not very up to date.
Because of Mogens Larsen, Bent Lrsen, Lance Amstrong and a lost bet a new
mode larsen_mode. Default is 0. larsen_mode tries to play like Bent Larsen
in the opening.
larsen_mode 1
will randomly open with c4 or f4 as white.
larsen_mode 2
will mirror whites first move as black, i.e. f4 f5, e4 e5, Nf3 Nf6 etc.
larsen_mode 3
will do both of the above.
Note, that larsen_mode can not be acknowledged, when playing under
a GUI, that provides its own book.
Allow time allocation to be influenced by the user by two new commands.
mintime_factor (default 0.5). Yace allocates usually a time for search.
When it is finished with one depth, it will look if mintime_factor of
this time is allready over. If yes, it will stop the search and save
some time. The motivation of this small number is, that often searching
the searching of the first move in the next depth will need more
time, than everything searched allready (especially when much information
is available from hash tables). If the search of the first move cannot be
finished, no information is gained, and the time is lost. So, it doesn't
make any sense to start the next depth.
nmoves_inctime (default 0)
When just out of book, Yace can allocate more time now. When nmoves_inctime
is 5, for the first move out of book, yace will allocte 100% more time,
the second 80% more time, ... and the 5th 20% more time.
The defaults for the two new commands corresppond to the time allocation
of previous versions of Yace. In game in mode giving a nmoves_inctime
a value of (say) 8 seems superior to the defaults.
Implemented Analyze mode.
Check the input stream more often, when pondering or in Analyze mode.
Show the material balance at the end of the PV in brackets instead of
parentheses. Thanks to Tim Foden for his suggestion.
When Yace fails high in zero window search, it shows the PV with
t+. Rarely it fails low again for the same move at the same depth. This
is shown with t-, and the best PV is the one before t+. This is ok
when using Yace in command line mode or under its own graphical interface.
Under Winboard, the last shown PV was not the current one. Fixed this
by repeating the best PV.
Changed the method of counting nodes. Yace will now count less nodes
and will show less nodes/s. Actually it is even slightly faster, nevertheless.
Acknowledge NAGs in the opening book. See new section about book customizing
in readme.txt. The current method more or less was suggested by Mogens
Larsen. Thanks a lot for his efforts.
Stop clocks in force mode.
While pondering Nf6 didn't work, but g8f6 did work to input a move, fixed.
Implemented hint.
Don't post the material evaluation at the end of the PV in Fritz mode.
Don't show the 'H' after a move in the PV in Fritz mode (H means, that
this continuation was found in the hash table).
Now Fritz will show the PV of Yace.
Post less lines in xboard mode (No prompt and not the selected search time).
This also seems to fix problems with Wbengine by Remi Coulom. Thanks to
Ray MacFadyen for reporting and testing.
Experimentally increased Castle Bonus.
Added a hack, so that time control may work under Fritz. The problem
was, that Fritz sends new before every move. Due to Tim Mann's description
of the engine interface, this means, that the engine shall be black.
Then Fritz sends time. This shall set the engines (black) clock. Then
Fritz sends all moves of the game, then go. When playing as white, the
time is wrong. Added work around for this (in Fritz mode only). Please
send feedback, if it works.
Implemented "edit enhancements" for Fritz mode. Yace will accept the
Fritz style commands for castling rights and ep target. (Winboard
doesn't send those when setting up a position)
Ponder command for Fritz style pondering implemented. So, it should
be possible to set
PonderMode = True
CastleAndEP = True
AnalyzeMode = True
in yace.init (the init file for Fritz)
Note, that on my single processor machine, Yace seems only to get about
15% of the CPU time when playing against Fritz with permanent brain.
Without permanent brain, the CPU time seems to be fair when playing
against a native Fritz engine. When playing against a Winboard adapter
engine, Yace seems much slower (only 50% or even less of usual performance
against TCB.)
Send the whole PV to Fritz, which doesn't seem to suffer from the
buffer overflow problem from Winboard (see news of 0.18 and 0.20).
Increased the saftey margin for the time control. If enough time is
on the clock, Yace will try too keep at least 2 seconds, to account
for delays, that may occure while communicating with the GUI.
Added error message, when input command fails.
Added yace.init for Fritz to the distribution. (After unpacking the
zip, this file may be called yace~1.ini, so you have to rename it
to yace.init)
Changed piece values available with nval=1 to 80, 340, 350, 500, 1000.

Quite a few people have tested and sent feedback for various pre releases
of 0.22. Thanks a lot to Dann Corbit, Christian Goralski, Mogens Larsen,
Christian Liebert, Ray MacFayden, Manfred Meiler, Gerhard Sonnabend,
Aaron Tay.

Version 0.21 06.07.2000
new will disable force mode. This seems to be needed to play on FICS, but
not for "normal" winboard games. Thanks to Joakim Nilsson for reporting
and testing this.
Move now under winboard implemented (Was working under xboard already).
Make most of the null move algorithm user selectable. New commands
null_low (default 3.0), null_high (3.0), null_endgame (2.0) and
null_split (4.5). See readme.txt for some technical description of
these parameters. Feedback about experiments with null_high 3.5
and default null_split or null_split 6 appreciated.
No null command anymore. (Actually, when you type null 2.5, Yace
will interprete it as null_low 2.5, but it's better to use null_low.)
Fixed a bug in the book move selection, when the sum of the move counts
was very large.
Allow a little bit more variation of book moves. Earlier versions
didn't allow moves, that were played less than 6% of the time in the
situation. Allow 3% now. Also, when the move was played more than
50 times, it will be allowed, even if it was played less the 3% of
the time (but will be selected with a very low probability).
Implemented pondering. (But still some deficiences with pondering)
Use easy and hard. By default, no pondering. Time code for pondering is
still primitive. Just uses 40% more time, when pondering is allowed, and
more than 5 moves are left.
Implemented remove command ("Retract Move" from winboard).
New piece values (almost untested, so old values are default)
New command nval. Put
nval 1
into yace.ini to get the new piece values. Old values (P,N,R,Q)
are 100, 320, 330, 500, 1000 centipawns, new values are
100, 335, 340, 560, 1150. This should Yace help to not make bad trades
in the early game.
Increased the value for the pawn shield significantly.
Thanks to Christian Goralski, Frank Quisinsky and Aaron Tay for testing.
Fixed bug in level command. Giving the time as min:sec didn't work.
Accept fritz command.
Accept reset command for clearing hash tables.

Version 0.20 29.06.2000
Added table bases, new (Nalimov) format, compressed or uncompressed.
Thanks to Andrew Kadatch for permisson, to use the compression code,
and of course to Eugene Nalimov. With his source and documentation,
it was much easier, than I thought. Also thanks to Mogens Chr. Larson,
Volker Pittlik and Christian Goralsiki, for testing this.
Add a line like
tbldir e:\egtb
to yace.ini. Yace will use 2 Mb of cache for the table bases (should be
adjustable soon).
Yet another try for to fix the buffer overflow of winboard. The
fix advertized for 0.18 was wrong. Now, Yace will post much less
to winboard. The left out parts will be in the yace log.
Got rid of the null_threat command. This is redundant with "inullthreat".
Was never documented, so no problem.
Got rid of some short cuts for hash table hits, when the score was mate.
This worked well, when all the mates were searched, but now, we get some
mates for free from the EGTB tables. Hope, this won't hurt too much.
New KPK evaluation code. Thanks to Dann Corbit for reporting the bug.
Don't post stupid PV's with repeated null moves from the hash table anymore.
Got rid of a small speed enhancement in search, that only speeded up test
positions a tiny little bit and slowed down real games a tiny little bit.
Added rem and ; commands to allow commenting the ini file. Comments must be
on their own lines like

rem This is a comment
; and this also.
  REM You can indent comments.
ReM As with all yace commands, rem is case insensitive.
; Due to my lazyness, there must be at least one space character
; after the semicolon.
hash=10M ; This is *not* allowed.

Got rid of an old bug, where Yace sometimes started to think after a
setboard command.
Added a pointer to Mogens Larsen's site for book downloading.
Suggesting to use hash 0 before book creation, to save memory.
Print the version number into test.sum.
Fixed a stupid bug, where Yace could castle through check, when the
checking piece was a pawn. Thanks to Dan Andersson for reporting this
and providing a reproducable test case.

Version 0.18 20.06.2000
Fractional extensions.
New commands icheck, irepcheck, irecapture, ipawn7, inullthreat.
defaults:      1.0     0.59       0.59        1.0       1.0
See readme.txt under fractional extensions. This change slightly
slows down the search engine. (In Yace 0.17 and earlier, all the
defaults would have been 1.0)
No experience, if this helps in real games yet.
The null command no accepts a floating point value. (So you can write
null=2.5).
Winboard very rarely crashed, when Yace posted a long line at the end
of the search -> in xboard_mode truncate the line.
Ignore SIGINT for xboard compability.
Penalize moving the king from the base line in early game.
Minor hash table changes and speed-ups.

Version 0.17  16.06.2000
Small addition to readme.txt
Fixed bug in Position editing. (Castling rights might have been wrong.)
Accept the name of the ini file as a command line option. This
makes testing of tuning parameters easier. So you can call
yace yacetest.ini
To make logging work, both instances must write to a different logfile.
No other command line options are accepted. When no command line
option is given, yace.ini will be used.
Fixed timing bug on some Windows system. Thanks to Volker Pittlik
for finding this, and his help with debugging.
Added loga command. (Append to logfile)
Suggesting to use loga yace.log in yace.ini (Formerly, log yace.ini
was suggested.)
While doing this found a bug in the log command. When a second log
command was given, the old file wasn't closed. (Would be closed
at program end anyway, but this way, one could run out of file
descriptors)
Added rmoves and rscore commands. When Yace detects rmoves moves
with a score smaller than rscore, it will resign. Allowed values
for rmoves are 3 <= rmoves <= 20 amd -6 >= rscore >= -20. rscore
can be a floatimg point value (I.e. rscore=-6.8). To let Yace resign
soon, put the following lines into yace.ini:

resign om
rmoves 3
rscore -6

Still, Yace will not resign by default. The (new) default for rscore is -8.0
and for rmoves 4. Thanks to Mogens Larsen for his suggestion.

Version 0.16  14.06.2000
(Hopefully) found the repetition bug. (Thanks to Gabor Szots for posting
the FIDE rules.) I thought the position must be repeated 3 times (vs.
occure for the third time)

Version 0.15
Implement an experimental version of resigning. To enable put a line
resign on into yace.ini. (Default is resign off.) No clock considerations
yet.
Updated readme.txt a little bit.
Make the not supported commands silent in xboard mode.
Implement post/nopost.
Accept the analyze command, answer: Error (unknown command): analyze
Accept the bk command.
Accept the computer command.
Accept the name command.
Accept the rating command.
Accept the hint command.
Accept the draw command. All of these are noops.
Bug fixed in time code (for Windows only).
Bug fixed where draw was not recognized, because only one move was possible.
New hash table strategy: Make it easier to overwrite entries from previous
search.
Less lines posted in xboard_mode.
Posting shows some more information.
.: finished this depth
f.: after search is over, finished this depth
u.: after search is over, this depth is partly unfinished
t: best at this depth so far
t+: move seems better (fail high), research with larger window *)
t-: fails low again (shouldn't happen too ofen) *)
++: Much better than expected, start search again with new window. *)
--: Much worse than expected, start search again with new window. *)

*)
PV shown doesn't make much sense, it is such the PV that failed high
or low. The researching should show a better PV.

Version 0.14
Minor evaluation tweak: Yace shouldn't loose castling rights that easy
anymore. Freepawn are a tiny bit more worth now. Default positional
score is a bit higher now.
New command pval:
pval=1.0 [default, old default would have been 0.67]
pval=1.5 [positional scores are higher]
The "=" can be replaced by one (or more) space character(s).
Values between 0.5 and 2.0 are accepted.
To experiment put such a line in yace.ini
Of course no floating point will be used internally.
Changed invalid move to Illegal move.
Don't complain about result anymore (but still ignore).
Move ordering enhancements.
Added a few error messages.
Deleted some debug output.
